---
description: >-
  Compare and contrast different types of Steganography methods that are used
  for hiding confidential data.
---

# WEEK 3

**Steganography** according to Wikipedia is the practice of concealing a message within another message or a physical object. In computing/electronic contexts, a computer file, message, image, or video is concealed within another file, message, image, or video. The word steganography comes from Greek steganographia, which combines the words steganós  meaning "covered or concealed", and -graphia meaning "writing"

**Steganography Types**The type of cover data is also the type of steganography. Today, steganography is examined as text, image,audio, video and protocol steganography.**Text Steganography**Confidental data is hidden in text files. Different methods can be used to hide the data in the text file. Thesemethods include;• Format Based Method: Confidential data is hidden inside cover data with methods such as addingtext spaces, deliberate typing errors, sizes of writing types.This method is easily detectable by acomputer software, hence, it is a less preferred method.• Random and Statistical Method: Hidden data is stored inside character strings. Places whereconfidential data are hidden must be reported to the extracter.• Linguistics Method: Hidden data is stored in the syntactic structure.**Image Steganography**It is the method of hiding data inside a an image file as cover data. In image steganography, pixel densities areused to hide the data. Most commonly used image formats as cover data are; BMP, PNG, JPEG, TIFF and GIF\(Kamble et al., 2013\). Image steganography uses the weaknesses of the human visual system \(HVS\). Mostcommonly used methods in image steganography;• Least Significant Bit \(LSB\)• Spread spectrum• F5• Palette embedding• Wavelet transform• Data masking**Audio Steganography**This method hides data inside sound files. In this method, audio file formats such as WAV, AU and MP3 areused as cover data. Audio steganography has different methods. These methodsinclude;• Least Significant Bit \(LSB\)• Parity coding• Phase coding• Spread spectrum• Echo hiding**Video Steganography**It is the technique of hiding any kind of file or data inside a digital video format file. Video steganographygenerally uses H.264, Mp4, MPEG and AVI video formats as cover data. A video file is a simultaneouscombination of audio and video. So almost all of the steganography techniques that can be applied on image andaudio files can be applied on video files. Video steganography provides less perceptibility because video is thefast flow of images and sounds. Due to the large size of video files, payload capacities ofvideo steganography is quite large.**Network or Protocol Steganography**It aims to hide confidental data inside a cover object which is aprotocol such as TCP, UDP, ICM and IP.Thereare hidden channels in the OSI layer networking model, where steganography can be used.**Steganography Defense**Detecting and managing malicious use of steganography already happening on a network isvery difficult. According to **Barwise**,_“If an adversary is to able to penetrate a network successfully and unsuspectingly installmalware onto a system that uses digital steganography to hide its presence, then thenetwork and all associated data contained therein should be considered entirelycompromised \(Theoretical Framework\)_.This is a good description of how difficult it is to detect and respond to the use of hidden datatechniques against your information resources. Antivirus and IPS are not likely to detectmalicious content in images or audio. It is difficult to detect network-based steganography withmonitoring solutions. Consequently, the best approach to steganography defense is theimplementation of known ways to prevent infiltration of malware and unwanted utilitysoftware.PreventionThe first step is the identification of ways steganographic tools and infected carriers can findtheir ways onto your network. The next step is to block them. In addition to implementingantivirus, IPS, and firewalls according to current best practices,• Remove local admin access from all day-to-day accounts• Only allow installation of whitelisted applications• Strictly enforce least privilege and need-to-know• Segment the network and prevent access to database servers to anything butapplication servers and strictly manage traffic entering and leaving the segments byusing explicit allows• Ensure all applications that access database servers have strong input validation• Prohibit or strictly manage script and macro execution• Consider blocking or alerting on suspicious movement of certain file types, includingstripping them from all email messageso Image fileso Audio fileso Video fileso Larger than normal Office applications \(normal for your organization\)• Only download and install applications or other media from the internet that includes avalid hash value you can check• Block general use of USB storage• Train users not to download images, songs, video, and other media from the internet,especially from social networking sitesHow an organization approaches these controls depends on its unique operating environmentand management’s willingness to deal with the potential employee frustration. It is all aboutrisk and management’s appetite for risk.Deep Secure developed a novel approach to prevention. Their content threat removal toolsassume all content is compromised. Original content is not delivered to the recipient. Instead,obvious business/functional information is stripped and placed into a new document/file. Thisreconstructed document/file is delivered, and the original is dropped.**Monitoring and Detection**As always, assume malicious actors find ways to circumvent your prevention controls.• Monitor network behavior for anomalous packet traffic such as that described in thesection, Attack Command and Control• Monitor user behavior for unusual access and large data transfers• Scan all computers, especially user devices, for steganography tools• Periodically use forensics tools to test all or a meaningful sample of potential carriersfound on the network to determine if they might contain hidden information**CONCLUSION:**  
**Steganography is used for both good and malicious purpose either to secure confidential and sensitivve data or to steal or backdoring the network. The big problem lies in guiding against the malicious use of steganography, on a scale of 1-10, the possibility of detecting it falls between 1-4 depending on your level of expertise, so the best way of guiding against it is by preventing it from happening.** _**REFERENCE:**_[_**https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330162221\_A\_REVIEW\_AND\_COMPARISON\_OF\_STEGANOGRAPHY\_TECHNIQUES \(Links to an external site.\)**_](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330162221_A_REVIEW_AND_COMPARISON_OF_STEGANOGRAPHY_TECHNIQUES)[_**https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333320046\_Steganography\_Security\_Challenges\_and\_Defense**_](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333320046_Steganography_Security_Challenges_and_Defense)

